---
id: networking
title: Networking
---

The Skyhash protocol uses a very simple data exchange model.

:::info This is for version 0.8.0!
This information on networking only corresponds to Skytable 0.8.0 (Octave). If you're using a different version consider looking for the appropriate document.
:::

We use three connection stages:

- **Client handshake**: The client sends a handshake packet
  - The handshake contains all necessary information to successfully establish a connection
  - The structure of the client handshake depends on the authentication plugin in use (since authentication data has to be exchanged before the connection can be established)
  - For the `pwd` plugin the client handshake looks like this:
    ```
    H00000<username length>\n<password length>\n<username><password>
    ```
- **Server handshake**:
  - **Accepted:** If the server accepts the handshake information then it will respond with: `H000`
  - **Rejected**: If the server rejects the handshake information then it will respond with `H01<8-bit error code>`. You can find out what happened using [the error code index](errors)
- **Data exchange**: This is where the client and server exchange data

How to communicate:
- Open a TCP connection to the server
- Do the handshake (as described above) and handle any errors
- Encode queries as described below


## Client

### Data types

The client side needs to send encoded data types to the server (in the form of parameters) so that the server can process them.

Types:
- Null: Encoded as `0`
- Bool: Encoded as `1<0 or 1>\n`
- Unsigned integer: A 64-bit unsigned integer. Encoded as `2<integer>\n`
- Signed integer: A 64-bit unsigned integer. Encoded as `3<integer>\n`
- Float: A 64-bit (double precision) floating point value. Encoded as `4<float>\n`
- Binary: A binary blob. Encoded as `5<size>\n<payload>`
- String: An UTF-8 string. Encoded as `6<size>\n<payload>`

### Queries

A query has three sections:
- The metaframe:
  - Contains metadata about the query
  - Encoded as: `<total packet size>\n` (total size of the other two sections)
- The dataframe header: Encoded as `<query body size>\n`
- The dataframe:
  - First part contains the query body, encoded as: `<query body>` (the query body is simply appended here)
  - Second part contains the payload body with all the parameters, encoded as: `<parameter>\n ...` (repeat for all parameters)

## Server

### Data types

The server will respond with different data types, depending on the context. These include:
- Null: Encoded as `0`
- Bool: encoded as `1<0 or 1>\n`
- Unsigned integers:
  - First byte: 2 -> 8-bit, 3 -> 16-bit, 4 -> 32-bit, 5 -> 64-bit
  - Payload: `<integer>\n`
- Signed integers:
  - First byte: 6 -> 8-bit, 7 -> 16-bit, 8 -> 32-bit, 9 -> 64-bit
  - Payload: `<integer>\n`
- Simple collections:
  - First byte: 10 -> binary, 11 -> string
  - Payload: `<size>\n<body>`
- Complex collections:
  - First byte: 11 -> list
  - Payload: `<size>\n<other server data types>`

### Responses
The server can respond with any of the data types [above](#data-types-1), or it can respond with a special response type like these:

- **Error**: Encoded as `0x10<16-bit error code>`
- **Row**: The server has returned a row. Encoded as `0x11<column cnt>\n<data type>`
- **Empty**: This indicates that the query ran successfully but nothing appropriate can be returned (like HTTP's 200 status). Encoded as `0x12`
- **Multirow**: The server has returned multiple rows. Encoded as `0x13<row count>\n<rows ...>`
