---
id: snapshots
title: Snapshots
---

Skytable supports automated snapshots that can be used for periodic backups.
Skytable's snapshotting system is dead simple and works in a similar way to [BGSAVE](persistence).

## Enabling snapshots

Snapshots aren't enabled by default &mdash; you have to enable them by using the configuration file or [command line arguments](config-cmd). To your existing configuration file, just add the following block:

```toml
[snapshot]
every = 3600
atmost = 4
failsafe = true # optional
```

Here's what these values mean:

- `every` - Number of seconds to wait before creating another snapshot
- `atmost` - The maximum number of snapshots to keep
- `failsafe` - This indicates whether the database should stop accepting write operations if
  snapshotting fails

## Storage of snapshots

All the created snapshots are stored in a `data/snaps` folder in the current directory.
The snapshot files are named in the format: `YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS`. On the other hand,
[remote snapshots](#remote-snapshots) are stored in the `data/rsnap` folder.

## How snapshots work

As mentioned earlier, snapshots work just like `BGSAVE`. A task is spawned that starts encoding
(and writing data) to a file; once all the data is successfully flushed to disk, the task exits.

## Methods of creating snapshots

Snapshots can be created automatically by using the configuration file. However, if you want to create snapshots remotely, you can use the [ `MKSNAP` ](actions/mksnap) action. This will only
create snapshots if it is enabled on the server-side, unless you use
[truly remote snapshots](#remote-snapshots).

## Remote snapshots

Irrespective of whether snapshots are enabled on the server side, you can use _truly remote snapshots_.
Such snapshots can be created by using the [`MKSNAP`](actions/mksnap) action. To do this,
pass a second argument to `MKSNAP` with the desired name of your snapshot. This will create
a snapshot in the `data/rsnap` directory.

:::tip
Since snapshots are intended for data backups &mdash; you can do a little _trick_ to make these
backups offsite-backups: mount a network file system or a different drive and create a folder
for storing your snapshots in it. Now, symlink the `data/snaps` directory to your
_remotely mounted directory_. You now have offsite backups!
:::
