---
id: actions-overview
title: Actions overview
---

Actions are exactly what they say -- they do something! You can think of actions to be like
shell commands: you run a command with arguments and you get some corresponding output.

Remember the `HEYA` you ran in the earlier document? Yup, that's an action. All kind of _quering_ in Skytable is done through actions. Actions are classified into two kinds:

- DDL (Data definition language) Actions: These actions enable us to interact with the structures
  that store our data
- DML (Data manipulation language) Actions: These actions enable us to access and manipulate the data stored in our database

## Taking _action_

If you're coming from a SQL background, you might be used to the _DML_ way of things. That's right, DML actions are _similar_.
Let us try out a few basic DML actions (don't worry &mdash; you'll learn about DDL in the next few documents).

### SET

The `SET` action lets us assign a key to a value (in a key/value table). For example:

```sql
SET x 100
```

will assign the key `x` to `100`. But how do we get it?

### GET

The `GET` action lets us fetch keys. For example:

```sql
GET x
```

will return the `100` that we set in the last step.

### UPDATE

The `UPDATE` action lets us update the values of keys. For example:

```sql
UPDATE x 200
```

will update the value of `x` to `200`

### DEL

The `DEL` action lets us remove keys from the database. For example:

```sql
DEL x
```

will remove the key `x` from the database.

Didn't we just do a **C**reate-**R**ead-**U**pdate-**D**elete? The infamous CRUD! Now that you know
some basic actions, you can take a look at the [full index of actions](all-actions).
