---
id: terrapipe
title: Terrapipe 0.3.1
---
:::note About this document
**Date:** 6<sup>th</sup> Aug, 2020  
Copyright &copy; 2020 Sayan Nandan
:::
## Introduction

Terrapipe is an application layer protocol like HTTP, built on top of TCP. It is used by the [Terrabase Database](https://github.com/terrabasedb/terrabase) for client-server communication. All clients willing to communicate with the Terrabase Database must implement this protocol. This document serves as a guide to implement the protocol.

## Concepts

Terrapipe works in a query/response action similar to HTTP's request/response action. Clients send queries and the bytes sent over the TCP stream is collectively called the query packet. The server responds with a response packet.

Both these packets have two frames:

* Lines 1 and 2 (Metaframe):
    - The first line (before the first LF) in any of these packets is called the _metaline_ - this contains query/response metadata such as the action type and content length.
    - The second line (before the second LF) is also a part of the metaframe, and it is called the _metalayout_
* Line 3 and the subsequent lines are collectively called the dataframe
* Each chunk of bytes following the metaframe is terminated with `\n` i.e with LF

## Supported actions

* `GET` : A get query
* `SET` : A set query
* `UPDATE` : An update query
* `DEL` : A delete query
* `HEYA` : A status check query

(The number of commands will continue to increase in the future)

## Response codes

| Code | Description | Notes |
| ---- | ------- | ----- |
`0` | Okay ||
`1` | Not Found||
`2` | Overwrite Error||
`3` | Invalid Metaframe|The metaframe has an illegal format|
`4` | Incomplete| The query packet is incomplete|
`5` | Server Error| An error occurred on the server side
`6` | Other error| Some other error response. This error text would be sent in the dataframe|

## Types of query/response packets

Queries are of two kinds:

* Simple Query Packets - These queries will usually do just one thing. that is one action at a time
* Pipeline Query Packets - These queries are a combination of multiple individual queries

## Simple Query Packet

### Simple Query Metaframe (SQM)

This is what a typical SQM looks like:

``` 
<METALINE>
<METALAYOUT>
```

### Line 1: Metaframe _metaline_

The metaline has the following general structure:

``` 
*!<CLENGTH>!<ML_LENGTH>
```

Where:

* `CLENGTH` - This is the total content length excluding the _metalayout_ line
* `ML_LENGTH` - This is the length of the _metalayout_ line

#### Example metaline

``` 
*!22!12
```

### Line 2: Metaframe _metalayout_

The metalayout is kind of like the _skip sequence_ which determines how many bytes are to be read from each partition preceding a `\n` . The metalayout has the following general structure:

``` 
#<l1_len>#<l2_len>#<l3_len>#<ln_len>
```

The `<l1_len>` , `<l2_len>` and so on are the number of data bytes in each line in the dataframe, exclusive of the LF ('\n') byte.

#### Example metalayout

For a dataframe which looks like: `set\nsayan\n17` , the corresponding metalayout should be:

``` 
#3#5#2
```

### Line 3 (and subsequent lines): Dataframe

The dataframe, well, contains data! It has the following general structure:

``` 
set\nsayan\n17
```

Every piece of data is separated by `\n` . Do note: this wouldn't cause any issues if a piece of data contains a newline byte as a part of it, since the metalayout defines the skip sequence. __Please read the [note on types](#a-note-on-types)__

## Simple Response Packet

Simple responses have the following general structure:

``` 
*!<RESPCODE>!<CLENGTH>!<ML_LENGTH>
<METALAYOUT>
<DATAFRAME>
```

Where:

* `RESPOCDE` - This can have any of the values [listed here](#response-codes)
* `CLENGTH` - This is the total content length excluding the _metalayout_ line
* `ML_LENGTH` - This is the length of the _metalayout_ line
* `METALAYOUT` - This has the same structure as the [query packet's metalayout](#line-2-metaframe-metalayout)
* `DATAFRAME` - This has the same structure as the [query packet's dataframe](#line-3-and-subsequent-lines-dataframe)

## Pipeline Query Packet

Pipeline queries are not very different from simple queries, except for the metaline in the metaframe.
Pipeline query packets have the following general structure:

``` 
$!<CLENGTH>!<ML_LENGTH>
<METALAYOUT>
<DATAFRAME>
```

If you may have noticed, the only difference here, is that, instead of the asterisk (*), you have a Dollar Sign ($). All the other fields have the same meaning as in the [simple query packet](#simple-query-packet)

## Pipeline Response Packet

Again, pipeline responses are not much different from simple responses, except for having a Dollar Sign ($), in place of the asterisk (*) in the metaline, in the metaframe.
It has the following general structure:

``` 
$!<RESPCODE>!<CLENGTH>!<ML_LENGTH>
<METALAYOUT>
<DATAFRAME>
```

Where the values in `<>` have their usual meanings.

## A note on types

The server doesn't care much about types when queries are sent, but when  pipelined queries are run, the server acts a little differently. This is because each query in a pipelined query will give different outcomes - some of them may return
response codes, some of them may return arrays and some of them may return _untyped_ things - since most responses are typically sent as strings, and it is the client's/user's responsibility to parse it into the required types.
The server will respond in the following formats, for pipelined queries:

* Most values - `+<value>` is returned for most successful returns
* Response codes - `!<respcode>` is returned if the query returns a response code
* Arrays - [the usual way](#array-responses)

### Array responses

Array responses are actually pretty simple! They look like:

``` 
&<n>element1\n
element2\n
...
elementn\n
```

where `<n>` is the number of elements in the array.

## A complete example

### Simple Query/Response

Here, we will assume that all operations are legal, that is while creating new keys, we will assume that the keys didn't exist, that is, there will be no `Overwrite Error` .

This is the query I run on `tsh` :

``` shell
tsh> set sayan 17
```

`tsh` will send bytes like the following (excluding TCP's SYN/SYN ACK/ACK):

``` 
*!13!7\n#3#5#2\nSET\nsayan\n17\n
```

The server does the action and writes the following back to the TCP stream:

``` 
*!0!0!0
```

This is basically a success message, `*` since it is a simple response, `0` for `RESPCODE` , since the action was successful, `0` s for `CLENGTH` , and `ML_LENGTH` since no data is returned.

### Pipelined Query/Response

Since we don't have any way to run a pipeline query from `tsh` (at the moment), we will assume that the pipeline query wants to do the following:

* `SET sayan 17`
* `GET foo`
* `HEYA`
Then, the client will send a query packet like:

``` 
$!25!12\n#3#5#2#3#3#4\nSET\nsayan\n17\nGET\nfoo\nHEYA
```

Then, the server will respond like:

``` 
$!15!6\n#2#6#5\n!0\n+Hello\n+HEY!
```

Voila! We just saw terrapipe in action. Phew, we're done!