---
id: index
title: Introduction
sidebar_label: Home
slug: /
---

Welcome to Skytable's docs! Skytable is a free and open-source modern NoSQL database that builds on the foundations of performance, scalability, powerful querying and a robust type system. Skytable can be deployed as just a single binary file with no special system dependencies and only relies on the operating system's `libc` implementation.

## Guide

Skytable has it's own query language, BlueQL<sup>TM</sup> which provides everything across DDL, DCL and DML queries and exists to be a very powerful and secure alternative to SQL. If you're coming from SQL, you should feel just at home — BlueQL has a few small but important operating differences from SQL but has very similar syntax.

We recommend you to follow the guide in this sequence (but feel free to skip any sections):
    - [**Installation**](installation) and [**using the CLI**](using-the-repl): Get everything installed on your local system
    - [**System overview**](architecture): A brief introduction to Skytable, including an overview of the data model, query systems and storage
    - **BlueQL**:
      - [**Introduction**](blueql/overview): Serves as a basic introduction to the query language and an (currently incomplete) informal specification with information on keywords, syntax and stuctures.
      - [**DDL**](blueql/ddl): Data definition with BlueQL
      - [**DML**](blueql/dml): Data manipulation with BlueQL
      - [**DCL**](blueql/dcl): Data control with BlueQL
    - [**Configuration**](system/configuration): Information to help you configure Skytable with custom settings such as custom ports, hosts, TLS, and etc.
    - [**Administration**](system/administration): Information on access control, user and other administration features
    - [**Resources**](resources/overview): Helpful resources
    - [**A guide to the new Skytable**](resources/migration): For old our returning Skytable users who are coming from older versions
    - [**Benchmarking**](benchmarking): A guide for load testing Skytable
    - [**Deployment**](deployment): An useful guide for deploying
    - [**Limits**](limits): An useful guide on system limits

## Getting help

We have a collection of resources [on this page](resources/overview). If you need in help in real-time, we recommend that you join our [Discord Community](https://discord.gg/QptWFdx) where you can get help directly from the developers and our community members. 
Most queries are usually answered there in a few hours!

## Contributing

If you find any typos, mistakes or any other scope of improvement - please don't hesitate to bring it up [here](https://github.com/skytable/docs/issues). Thank you ❤️!

## License

The documentation is licensed under the [CC-BY-SA-4.0 License](https://github.com/skytable/docs/tree/master/LICENSE)
