---
id: ssl
title: TLS configuration
---

Skytable lets you secure connections with TLS. This feature is built into Sky with OpenSSL and doesn't require you to have OpenSSL installed. You can enable SSL by using the [configuration file](#with-config-files) or by using [command-line arguments](#with-command-line-arguments).

### Step 1: Create a self-signed certificate and private key

This is outside the scope of this document, but you can read [this guide on Stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/a/10176685) to get a brief idea of creating one.

### Step 2: Add it to your configuration and launch

#### With config files

Add the following block:

```toml
[ssl]
key = "/path/to/keyfile.pem"
chain = "/path/to/chain.pem"
port = 2004
only = true
```

The above block is self-explanatory; you just have to add the paths to the private key and certificate files and add the port (if required).

By setting `only` to `true`, the server will only accept accept secure connections. In other cases,
the server listens to two ports: `2003` and `2004`, a non-TLS port and a TLS port (similar to port
80 and port 443 in HTTP/HTTPS). As expected, you can configure this port number to suit your needs.

#### With command-line arguments

Simply start `skyd` with:

```shell
skyd -z cert.pem -k key.pem
```

:::tip Tip
You can pass the `--sslonly` flag to force the server to only accept secure connections, disabling the non-SSL interface. When this flag is not passed, and other SSL options are given &mdash; the server listens to both SSL and non-SSL requests
:::

:::info Note
To use TLS with the Skytable shell (`skysh`) just run:

```
skysh -C /path/to/cert.pem --port [SSLPORT]
```

and you'll be on a secure connection. Don't forget the SSL port! The skytable daemon binds the secure
listener on a different port when in multi-socket mode.
:::
