---
id: limits
title: Limits
---

We've made every effort to provide a robust querying interface, but there are some **temporary limitations** that we think you 
should know about. We aim to remove the limitations over the next few releases which we expect should happen fairly quickly.

Skytable's limitations primarily come from a bunch of concerns:
- **Performance and scalability**: Most of our design decisions are influenced by concerns about performance. For example, it's very hard to efficiently scale multi-column indexes.
- **Reliability**: how reliable is the execution of the task? If it's like walking on eggshells, then we're not going to implement it (for example, unreliable distributed locking)
- **Security**: If it can't be run securely, then it's off our list

## Temporary limitations

- **Collections in fields are *partially frozen at the moment***:
  - You can add data to collections as you desire during an `INSERT`
  - However, a `SELECT` will return the *entire* collection and not an individual element
  - Similarly, an `UPDATE` can append to a non-nested list, but cannot append to a nested list
    - For example if your model has a field defined as `mylist: list {type: string}` you can add more elements to it in an `UPDATE` query like this: `UPDATE mymodel SET mylist += 'new element'`
    - However, if you have a field defined as `mylist: { list { type: list{type: string}} }` then you will not be able to append another list to it.
  - On the same note, you cannot `DELETE` an individual element right now
- **Models cannot be `volatile` yet**. If you've used Skytable before, you'd know that you could previously create `volatile` 
  models which were used as *caching tables* as in they didn't persist data across restarts. The `volatile` feature has been 
  temporarily removed because we're working on integrating it with the new storage engine.
- **`SELECT` doesn't allow multi-row fetch**. This is a severe limitation that will be removed very soon. This means that a `SELECT` will match one, and only one query

:::tip Work in progress
Individual element access in nested collections and multi-row `SELECT`s are on their way to stability. If you need these features
(which we consider to be a very plausible use-case) hang in with us and you should have it by 0.8.1.

**We're on it!**
:::

## Hard limitations

Following Skytable's design philosophy that closely encompasses NoSQL systems, the following hard limitations are set:
- **Only one index**: Right now, the only index that you can use is the primary index (primary_key -> row). This is due to  concerns about performance and scale
- **No mass updates**: We consider mass updates, such as setting `counter += 1` to every row in a model with multi-million rows
to be very slow and bad for performance. Hence, we do not allow mass updates at this time.
