---
id: actions-overview
title: Actions and Querying
---

Actions are exactly what they say &mdash; they do something! You can think of actions to be like
shell commands: you run a command with arguments and you get some corresponding output.  
In this document we'll explore actions, or what you may
call queries. We'll also explore the different kinds of queries that you can use with Skytable.

Remember the `HEYA` you ran in the earlier document? Yup, that's an action. All kind of _quering_ in Skytable is done through actions. Actions are classified into two kinds:

- DDL (Data definition language) Actions: These actions enable us to interact with the structures
  that store our data
- DML (Data manipulation language) Actions: These actions enable us to access and manipulate the data stored in our database

## Taking _action_

If you're coming from a SQL background, you might be used to the _DML_ way of things. That's right, DML actions are _similar_.
Let us try out a few basic DML actions (don't worry &mdash; you'll learn about DDL in the next few documents).

### SET

The `SET` action lets us assign a key to a value (in a key/value table). For example:

```sql
SET x 100
```

will assign the key `x` to `100`. But how do we get it?

### GET

The `GET` action lets us fetch keys. For example:

```sql
GET x
```

will return the `100` that we set in the last step.

### UPDATE

The `UPDATE` action lets us update the values of keys. For example:

```sql
UPDATE x 200
```

will update the value of `x` to `200`

### DEL

The `DEL` action lets us remove keys from the database. For example:

```sql
DEL x
```

will remove the key `x` from the database.

Didn't we just do a **C**reate-**R**ead-**U**pdate-**D**elete? The infamous CRUD! Now that you know
some basic actions, you can take a look at the [full index of actions](all-actions).

## Types of queries

### Simple queries

Simple queries are, well simple! You run a single action and there &mdash; you ran a simple query.

### Pipelined queries

Pipelined queries or simply pipelines enable clients to send multiple queries to the database server
at once. Responses for every query is returned in the order they query was sent. For example if you sent four queries like:
```sql
heya once
heya twice
heya thrice
heya finally
```
Then you'd get the echos in the following order:
```sql
"once"
"twice"
"thrice"
"finally"
```

Hence, the responses are returned in the order queries were issued.

:::note Limitations
Pipelines provide no transactional guarantees and hence shouldn't be relied on for the same.
:::

### Batches

Batches are currently in the _decision phase_ but aim to provide a way to overcome the limitations imposed by pipelines, hence providing stronger
guarantees. If you have any ideas, drop an [issue here](https://github.com/skytable/skytable/issues/new) and we'll be happy to consider it!
