---
id: building-from-source
title: Building from source
---
Of course you can build it from source &mdash; but with quite a bit of hassle. The database server is a bit fussy with its builds, so you'll need quite a few tools before you can actually start using it.

### Step 1: Install pre-requisites
As Skytable is written in Rust, you'll have to install the Rust toolchain to build it (a little messy, but not too messy). Go to [this page](https://rustup.rs/) to set up Rust on your local machine.

Besides, the TLS/SSL components are written in C (OpenSSL) &mdash; so you'll need to install:
* A C compiler for your platform
* GNU Make (`make`)
* Perl

### Step 2: Clone the tag
Run this from your terminal:
```
git clone --branch next https://github.com/skytable/skytable.git
```
:::tip Bonus tip
If you want to avoid downloading all the version history, run this instead:
```
git clone --depth 1 --branch next https://github.com/skytable/skytable.git
```
:::
### Step 3: Build it!
Expecting that you're still in the same directory, run:
```
cd skybase && cargo build --release
```
:::note
This will take **crazy long** at times, so hold on until Cargo finishes building things
:::
:::note Important note
Since you're building off `next`, it's always a good idea to create a debug build than a release build as you'll find some bugs which we'd love you to report [here](https://github.com/skytable/skytable). 

To create a debug build, just run `cargo build`, omitting the `release` flag.
:::
### Step 4: Get the binaries
You'll need to copy `sdb` and `skysh` (or `sdb.exe` and `skysh.exe` if on Windows) from the `skybase/target/release` folder. Be sure to copy these **exact files** and not something else!
### Step 5: Run it!
Now start the database server by running `./tdb` and then start the interactive shell by running `./tsh`. You're ready to use the [actions](actions/overview)!