---
id: using-the-repl
title: Using the REPL
---

Once you've set up Skytable [following our guide](installation), you can now get started using the REPL. Note that you must have downloaded the bundle. If not, go back to the installation guide and do it now.

## Starting the repl

Run this to start the command-line REPL:

```sh
./skysh
```

The REPL will then ask you for a password which you need to type in. This is the root password that you would have set during your installation, so if you don't remember it go ahead and check what you set during the installation step.

:::tip
Keep the root password safe! It's the admin access to your database and without it you won't be able to create or drop or alter
or ... do anything administrative. But if you do happen to lose it, there's an easy way to reset the password (this however requires you to stop the database, which is also the case with many other databases, and that's primarily for security).

You can read more in the [configuration](system/configuration) page.
:::

## Using the REPL

You will now see a welcome message and the REPL will prompt you to run something. Now is a good time to run `sysctl report status` which should just print out `(Okay)` in a cyan shade:
```sh
> sysctl report status
(Okay)
```

You can also run queries like: `inspect global` to see available global system information.

:::info Quick notes
- The REPL currently stores history in the `.sky_history` file. If you want to remove history, you can simply delete the file
- The REPL will automatically parameterize queries. Don't worry about what this means; you'll learn about it ahead.
- The REPL applies custom formatting to `DDL` queries. For example, even though  `inspect global` returns a JSON as a string,
the REPL formats it and outputs it without quotes, to improve readability
- To connect using different settings (the REPL will attempt to authenticate as `root` by default), see the options using `skysh --help`
:::

## First steps

Skytable's data model is discussed in depth on [this page](system-overview#data-model), but let us understand some basics. If you've used a SQL 
database, you would be used to the idea of a `database` &mdash; just like this, Skytable has `space`s. A `space` is a collection
of `models` (which are like SQL's `table`s with slightly different functionality) and other containers.

### Create a space

Let us create a `space`:

```sql
CREATE SPACE myspace
```

### Create a model

Let us create a `model`. We want to store something that resembles the structure:

```json
{
    "username": "string username",
    "password": "string password",
    "notes": [],
}
```

To do this, we create the following Skytable model:

```sql
CREATE MODEL myspace.mymodel(username: string, password: string, notes: list { type: string })
```

### Add, update and remove some data

```sql
INSERT INTO myspace.mymodel('sayan', 'password123', [])
UPDATE myspace.mymodel SET notes += "mynewnote"
SELECT notes, password FROM myspace.mymodel WHERE username = 'sayan'
```
