---
id: containers
title: Containers
---

Containers are _objects_ that hold other objects. In Skytable, we have two kinds of containers:

- **Keyspaces**: Keyspaces are containers that hold tables. The basic idea is to keep all the related tables for a given _application_ in one logical collection.
- **Tables**: Tables are **not tables**. Funny, isn't it? Instead, tables are structures that contain the actual data. Be it key/value or the future data models &mdash; it's all in a table

To interact with containers, we need to use DDL actions like `CREATE`, `DROP` and `INSPECT`.

## Entities

Every container is an entity. A keyspace being a top-level entity and a table being a low-level
entity. Hence a keyspace name or a table name can be called an _entity_ or _entity name_.

**Naming rules**

All entity names have the following naming rules:

- Names are case sensitive
- Names must begin with an ASCII alphabet (A-Z or a-z) or an underscore (`_`)
- Names must be lesser than or equal to 64 characters long
- Names must **not** begin with a digit (0-9)
- Names can contain digits anywhere else (except for the first character)

**Entity groups**

The most important thing is an _Entity Group_ which is also known as _Fully Qualified
Entity_ Syntax (FQE Syntax). FQE syntax is used to describe the full _path_ to a table. For example,
if you have a keyspace `supercyan` and you have a table `cyan` within it, then the FQE syntax will
be:

```
supercyan:cyan
```

This can be extremely helpful when running DDL queries.

:::note Important note
When you connect to Skytable, you are connected to the `default` keyspace which has a `default`
table. The `default` table or the `default` keyspace **cannot be dropped**.
There is another keyspace called the `system` keyspace which is not user-accessible and hence
**cannot be modified or dropped**.
:::

## Keyspaces

Like we noted above, keyspaces are logical collections of tables and is known as a top level container. Creating a keyspace is as simple as:

```sql
CREATE KEYSPACE <name>
```

while you can drop keyspaces by running:

```sql
DROP KEYSPACE <name>
```

> **Note:** Keyspaces can only be dropped if no other client is connected to it and if it contains no tables. This can be evaded by forcing removal through other DDL actions.

## Tables

Tables contain your actual data: be it key/value, or anything else. Tables reside within keyspaces. To create a table, you'll need to run:

```sql
CREATE TABLE <entity> <model>(modelargs) <properties>
```

### Properties

A table, apart from the data model's own properties, has some model-indpendent properties. Supplying these are optional.
The user-accessible property that you should know about is the `volatile` property.

#### The volatile property

Adding the `volatile` property after your model arguments makes your table volatile. This means that the table itself will exist, but none of its data will persist after a restart. This makes volatile tables extremely useful for caching.

Don't worry too much about the _model_ and _modelargs_ now &mdash; the next section will tell you about models.

### Table models

Just jump to [the models section](#models)

## Models

A model defines what kind of data is stored in a table. You can think of it to be a _type_ in a
programming language.

### The `keymap` model

A keymap model is the one you just interacted with in the earlier documents. A keymap is like an
associated array: it maps a key to a value. More importantly, it maps a specific _key type_ to a specific _value type_.

> **Warning:** Everything after `CREATE TABLE` is case sensitive!

This is how you create keymap tables:

```sql
CREATE TABLE <entity> keymap(<type>,<type>) <properties>
```

Here:

- `<entity>`: is your table name (or the FQE syntax for your table)
- `<type>`: is the [data type](#data-types)
- `<properties>`: are the optional properties [discussed earlier](#properties)

#### Data types

The keymap model supports the following types:

- `str`: A valid unicode string
- `binstr`: A binary string

(more types are expected to be shipped in future editions)

### Models in the future

With our goal to build a native multi-model database &mdash; we're working on several data models! All you need to do is hang around in our communities to know what is brewing!
