---
id: blueql
title: An overview of BlueQL
slug: /blueql/overview
---

BlueQL<sup>TM</sup> is Skytable's own query language that very closely follows the design of SQL but with many modern features 
and superior security. This document explores a basic overview of BlueQL.

Design principles:
- **Simplicity and clarity**: The language shouldn't be overwhelming to understand
- **Security with mandatory parameterization**: We want to reduce the surface of injection attacks. For this reason, [parameterization is mandatory](#parameters).

Just like SQL, BlueQL has three categories of commands/queries inside it:

- **DDL**: Data definition language is used to define, modify and/or remove DDL objects such as `space`s and `model`s
- **DCL**: Data control language is used to control the access to data, and perform other administrative tasks
- **DML**: Data manipulation language is used to manipulate data

Jump to [differences from SQL](#differences-from-sql).

## Language specification

### Identifiers
Can begin with any ASCII alphabet or an underscore (`_`) and then have any number of alphanumeric characters and/or underscores.

### Keywords

Keywords are identifiers with special meanings and hence can't be used as identifiers in other places. Here's a full-list of 
keywords:
```ts
[
    "sysctl", "create", "alter", "drop", "use", "inspect", "describe", "insert", "select", "update",
    "delete", "exists", "table", "model", "space", "index", "type", "function", "rename", "add",
    "remove", "transform", "set", "return", "order", "sort", "group", "limit", "asc", "desc", "all",
    "by", "with", "on", "from", "into", "as", "to", "in", "of", "and", "or", "not", "if", "else",
    "where", "when", "allow", "auto", "default", "null", "transaction", "batch", "lock", "read",
    "write", "begin", "end", "key", "value", "primary", "truncate"
]
```

### Data types

#### Boolean
A boolean value, either `true` or `false`

#### Unsigned integers

- `uint8`: unsigned 8-bit integer
- `uint16`: unsigned 16-bit integer
- `uint32`: unsigned 32-bit integer
- `uint64`: unsigned 64-bit integer

#### Signed integers

- `sint8`: signed 8-bit integer
- `sint16`: signed 16-bit integer
- `sint32`: signed 32-bit integer
- `sint64`: signed 64-bit integer

#### Floating point values

- `float32`: a single-precision float
- `float64`: a double-precision float

#### Simple collections

- `binary`: a binary blob represented as a sequence of `uint8` values
- `string`: an UTF-8 string

#### Complex collections

- `list`: a list of any of the data types, including nested lists
  - A list is represented as: `[]` with values inbetween. For example, a `list { type:string }` would be represented as:
    ```sql
    ["sayan", "loves", "dogs"]
    ```
  - **Lists cannot contain null values**
  - **List can be nested**: You can have heavily nested lists like: `[[[]], [["another one"]]]`
  - **List can only have one base type**: This means that if you have a list like `[[[string]]]` each element must either be the same nested list, or an empty list

:::info Note
New data types are frequently added, so treat this list as non-exhaustive.
:::

### Literals

- Null literal: `null`
- Numeric literals:
  - Unsigned: `1234`
  - Signed: `[-]1234`
- Floating point literals: `[-]1234.5678`
- String literals: `"hello"`
- Binary literals: \`binary\`
- List literals: `[..]`
- Dictionaries: `{<ident>: <literal>}`

:::warning Literals are not available everywhere
It is very important for you to know that literals are not allowed everywhere. The only literals allowed everywhere are:
- Lists
- Dictionaries

Read below to understand why.
:::

### Parameters

All literals apart from dictionaries and lists must be used as parameters. **BlueQL only allows literals as parameters**. For example, using the Rust client, if you were to run this:

```sql
insert into myspace.mymodel('sayan', 'pass123', ['myfirstnote'])
```

You are required to parameterize the query like this:

```rust
use skytable::query;

let query = query!("insert into myspace.mymode(?, ?, [?])", "sayan", "pass123", "myfirstnote")
```

If you try to run it without any parameters (don't forget that `skysh` automatically parameterizes for convenience) the query
won't even compile.

:::tip
Just so you know, parameterizing involves passing a separate parameter list, with each parameter encoded. You wouldn't need to worry about this because the client driver does all of that for you!

**The question is why? The answer is security.** SQL-injection vulernabilties have already costed companies a lot, so we don't
want to inherit that from SQL.

**Also, parameterization is exclusively possible for literals**. This means that whenever you're accepting data from an untrusted
source, it becomes a parameter. If you try to not use parameters, the query will not even compile.

On a final note, BlueQL doesn't support comments of any form also for security reasons.
:::

### Expressions

- `+=`: add RHS to LHS
  - Can be used outside arithmetic contexts
  - Add a char to a field `mystring`: `mystring += ",world"`
  - Add a list to a nested list field: `mylist += ["item in nested list"]`
- `-=`: subtract RHS from LHS
- `/=`: divide LHS by RHS
- `*=`: multiply LHS by RHS

## DDL

Queries include:
- Spaces:
  - `CREATE SPACE myspace [WITH { property: value, ... }]`
  - `ALTER SPACE myspace [WITH { property: updated_value, ... }]`
  - `DROP SPACE [allow not empty] myspace`
- Models:
  - `CREATE MODEL myspace.mymodel([primary] [null] field: field_type, ...) [WITH { property: value, ... }]`
  - `ALTER MODEL myspace.mymodel (ADD ... | UPDATE ... | REMOVE ...)`
  - `DROP MODEL [allow not empty] myspace.mymodel`
- `INSPECT GLOBAL`: inspects global state, shows a list of spaces and users
- `INSPECT SPACE <space>`: inspects a single space, shows a list of models and other things
- `INSPECT MODEL <model>`: inspects a single model, shows information about stored data and other things

## DML

- `INSERT INTO myspace.mymodel(...)`
- `SELECT col1, ... FROM myspace.mymodel WHERE ...`
- `UPDATE myspace.mymodel SET counter += 1 WHERE ...`
- `DELETE FROM myspace.mymode WHERE ...`

## DCL

Queries include:
- `SYSCTL REPORT STATUS`: returns the status of the system. (Not a control query per se)
- `SYSCTL CREATE USER "username" WITH { password: ... }`: create a new user
- `SYSCTL DROP USER "username"`: removes the user in question

## Differences from SQL

- No literals (see above)
- Mandatory parameterization (see above)
- No semicolons!
- Only one statement per query. For multiple statements batches must be used
- DML queries are point queries (hence must contain a `WHERE` clause)
