---
id: auth
title: Authentication and authorization
---

Skytable supports token-based authentication as an _authentication scheme_, with more on the way in
future releases. In this document, we explore how you can set up authentication on your Skytable
instance.

## Token-based authentication

Token-based authentication is just like password-based authentication with the exception that the
password is generated by the server, and is cryptographically strong. Read [more here](#the-token).

### Permission model

There are two kinds of users:

- **Superuser:** These users have access to everything
- **Standard user**: These users have access to all tables and keyspaces, but don't have access to the
  actions exclusive to the superusers. For example, the following actions cannot be performed by standard users:
  - `auth deluser`
  - `auth adduser`
- **Anonymous user**: This is the default account type you're logged into when you connect to an instance
  that has authn/authz enabled. This is a very limited account and only has access to the following:
  - `auth claim`
  - `auth login`

Currently, there can only be one superuser, which is the `root` account and any number of standard users.

### Enabling authn

1. Set an origin key using your preferred mode of [configuration](config). The origin key is a 40-character
   long ASCII string. The simplest way to generate a secure origin key is by using OpenSSL:

   ```shell
   openssl rand -hex 20
   ```

2. Now launch a `skysh` instance and connect to your instance
3. First claim the root account using your origin key:
   ```shell
   auth claim <origin-key>
   ```
   The server will respond with the _root token_. **Keep this safe; the root user can only be claimed once!**
4. Now create other users. These users are standard users.
   ```shell
   auth adduser <username>
   ```
   The server will again respond with a token for the given user
5. You can now login using the token:
   ```shell
   auth login <username> <token>
   ```

:::tip
See the complete documentation for the [`auth` action here](actions/auth)
:::

### The token

The password produced has 54 characters and is cryptographically strong and hence is extremely secure. The password has the following alphabet (character set):

```text
./ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZabcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz0123456789
```
